so at some point you gonna have to start
dealing with dates and times in your
Python programs and although this
should be easy there are actually
several pitfalls which just a really
they're waiting to trap the unwary
now there is two main sources of problems with dates
and times
localization and daylight saving and
they can really complicates things if
you don't handle them correctly or not
handled correctly now localization
that covers both the time in any
particular place and also the
format used to represent dates in that
particular location and there's not
necessarily any rhyme or reason to
this so as an example in Hoyt Mongolia Lasara
in China and Dhaka in Bangladesh lay on the line running on almost due north-south
but at 10 a.m. in Hoyt is 11 a.m. in
Lhasa and 9 a.m. in Dhaka so the UK
is part of the European Union but most
of Western Europe is one hour ahead now
daylight savings time
abbreviated to DST that involves moving
the clocks forward in spring resulting in
everyone getting up 1 hour earlier to take
advantage of the extra daylight as the
Sun rises earlier in the morning now
clocks are then put back one hour in
autumn but not every country practices
daylight saving though for example the
Philippines don't and that's why I've
explained what it is for you in case you are
not aware of what you know daylight
saving time is and its practiced in
Australia and I we've actually got at some
points in time three different times
zones in Australia covering these and I know at least
that many in the united states in fact
most of Africa India and Asia don't mess
around with their clocks and even in America
some states such as Arizona
don't bother with daylight saving time
at all but in the UK the actual dates
when the clock would changed use to be set
each year by a special meeting of
Admiralty which meant that you wouldn't
be sure you couldn't be sure that when
the change from one year to the next
fortunately countries that do observe
daylight savings now make the dates
known for several years in advance and
that's so that computer operating
systems like Windows and Linux Mac can maintain files with date which are sent
down to individual computers as part of
their normal update process you can imagine the sort of
the chaos
if they didn't know ahead of time when
daylight saving was meant to change your
computer and have the wrong date and time
so for scientific and computer
applications its usual to work in
Coordinated Universal Time that's
abbreviated to UTC is not a misspelling
UTC was chosen as a compromise between
the English and French translations
so in French the abbreviation would have
been TUC for temps universel coordonné not that I can speak French very well as
the English and the French have a long
history of not agreeing on anything
UTC was chosen as a compromise and you
may also find UTC interestingly enough
referred to also Zulu time now
dates and times in computer applications and
they're usually stored as UTC together
with an offset to represent the number
of hours ahead of or behind UTC and a flag
to indicate if daylight savings time applies
unless you can be sure that your program
will only ever be used in your current
time zone and frankly with the world
wide internet it's really a bad
assumption to do that though what you should do
is adopt this method rather than
storing local time in other
words you should really be storing your
dates as UTC and with that offset as I mentioned for
a particular time zone and now how does this relate to Python well the Python standard library provides three
modules to help us deal with dates and
times and that's the time date time and
calendar modules generally if you just
dealing with elapsed time and that would
be things like timing how long a program
takes to execute
and we will be doing that shortly then the time
module will be all we need but if you dealing
with actual dates and times and date time
would be more useful now the help for the
time model doesn't include a link so what I'm going to do is open up the link and put the
link in the Resources section so open up a browser and we ill refer to this a few times so it can be useful
to have a look at this page so as can see
this is the documentation for the time
and we will as i mentioned with refer to this will come
back to this a few times so some of the
documentation like what we've seen in the
past with Python can be confusing and
the reason particularly with time in
Python is that it discusses the underlying
c libraries Python uses to provide this time support
because c was closely tied to UNIX
systems documentation also talks about
UNIX systems a lot but most functions
also work on windows in order to make our
code portable across operating systems
we're not going to look at any UNIX only
functions were going to restrict
ourselves to the general
functions at work on all operating systems
and we've discussed most of the terms in
the terminology convention section of
the document but we haven't
mentioned rather epok so that
c libraries work by storing the number
of seconds since start date and that's
referred to generously as the epoc and in Python
on Linux Windows and Mac this is
January 1 1970 now
dates before these are represented by negative number although with that said there is a warning that dates
before the start of the epoch may not be
handled but if your dealing with historical
dates and it's actually probably a good
idea to store them as strings in a
standard format such as you know y y
y y dash mm dash dd otherwise
storing and manipulating dates as strings is not really a good idea and
it's note worth noting  that a 32 bit signed
integer will overflow up to two billion 147
483648 and
that many seconds after first of January
1970 is sometime in February
2038 so the bottom line is the
dates this is not going to work as of
Feb 2038 because we are going to be overflowing with 32bit integer
so physically the computer wont be able to store the
right number to sort of track forward
but hopefully by then
we still got a bit of time all of these
computers will be at least 64 bit but if
you happen to be using 32 bit operating
system now in 20 odd years time I'll
be asking but secondly we're dealing with
dates with them if you are going to be using that ok so a
lot of theory there it is time to get in to do
some code so let's go and see some of
the time functions in action so go back to IntelliJ
and open up and I've
created a new project going to create a
new Python file and call it datecalc
could just have been called literally
anything and lets print some time
structures from the epoch date or the
system that we're running
on my system is on a Mac so we can
start by typing...
....
...lets run that and we'll talk about each of the options
so line 3 specifies the number of seconds is 0 so
essentially that's gonna represent the
start of the epoch now the GMT time
function is also used to convert this
into tuple in GMT time always works in
UTC so to get the local time we
can use the local time function like you
can see on line 5 and that converts
the time in seconds as the start of the epock as well into a tuple and you can see the first print out you
can see that's clearly a tuple and its got the information relating to the
dates the first example from line 3 output remember I mentioned that Jan 1st 1970
and because we specified 0 its come back to
that date automatically and the second
example local time it's picked up on the
fact that today in Australia is the 13th of
January
so the date is 13th month is one in 2016
and it's even got the time there
13 49 15 obviously 1:49 in the afternoon
essentially because we didn't specify
the epoch it's defaulting to today's date and we
could have also if you wanted to because you can see the third
example time.time and that's
actually printed out the number of
seconds since the start of an epoch
that's the number of seconds since the
first the first 1970 so
we could have change the line on the code on line 5 and if we wanted to
we could have made that time....
...to call the time function and run that
and you can see we got the similar results there so the
documentation states that GM time
and local time convert the number of
seconds into a struct_time
and that's actually named tuple so we are going to be looking at how to create our owned named tuples
later in the course this is a good
opportunity to see how to use them so
they just like order tuples that
we've seen previously in the course but also
they allow the individual items in a
tuple to be accessed using a name and
that can be very useful way to make
a code much more readable
what will do is we will assign the current local time to a
variable which can be a tuple and use
both methods to access the individual items so you can see what I mean so I'm going to delete those two examples I'm going to put...
....
...so we can print the year here
and will just run this first so run that and I made a typo so just change that, that should be
underscore here and try running it again and you can see we got the
year and we got two ways of out putting it 2016 the
month and the day and that is the correct date because we've
selected local time or using local
time in Australia's as I'm recording the
video so you can basically print the year using
the tuple either the way we previously
seen using index 0 so that's this first
example time_here 0 in square brackets but we can also use
the name so it's time_here
.tm_year and that's the named
tuple so there's no practical
difference between the two ways but
using the name does make it more obvious
which fields are being accessed because obviously you contrast
time_here
is 0 in square brackets as year that's a lot harder than trying to figure out that is a year but this second part here
time_here.tm_year you
probably think ok this must be the
year so other than the fact that it's
easy to read there is no other differences no
other reason or practical difference
between the two ways because both
methods really do return the same value
so name tuples are very useful and we will look at
how to create our own as I mentioned after
we have covered classes and that is going to be
later in the course but for now whenever you see a
named tuple mention in the documentation
you can treat it just like an ordinary
tuple with the advantage of accessing
the individual fields I should say in the
tuple by their names so to have a look at how we can measure elapse time Python we are going to create a very
simple reaction time game once the game
has started it is gonna wait for a random number
of seconds before displaying a message
on the screen and that's going to
measure the time it takes the player to
press enter so let us start typing some of the code
because Python does provide a
number of ways to measure the elapse time
so we are gonna look at each one in turn so we are going to comment out the code we got in here
actually I'll leave the import in because we need that actually what I'll do is start typing down here so we are going to put...
....
....you can see we are specifying a random delay
between 1 and 6 and we are going to sleep for that
many seconds so...
...now we are going to ask them to press Enter
to stop....
...so we are going to basically recording the start
time before enter was press and then end
time afterwards and from there we can figure out how long
it took so from there we can put...
.....
.....same output but we are going to change
the parameter we are passing to...
......
.....
...so that is our program and lets talk about
some of the code firstly the on line
12 the from time using import
statement in that form is very useful
when experimenting with different
implementations of files and modules but
generally speaking you wouldn't leave
that in production code so one reason is that
it can be very hard for anyone else to know that
my_timer is actually the time
functions from the standard library and that
probably expected to be your own
function until they go back to the start
of the code and check the imports so once
again remember that your modules can contain hundreds of
lines of code and in this example it's
obviously very quick because its all in one
screen but you do want to consider
maintenance of your code down the
track now the reaction game is pretty simple
uses the random module to generate a
random number of seconds between one and
six which you can see on line 17 and then
on line 18 it uses time.sleep
where it actually basically sleeps with that amount of time
when it wakes up it stores the current time in start time and displays a message using input
so when the player presses
enter then time is stored now because we have used
the time function we can print the start and end times in the player's local time so the
STR if time that stands for string from
time that can be used to format the
local time tuple into a more readable
form according to a format string its
pass to it so there is a table in the documentation will go and have a look at it shortly but why don't we give this program a bit of a run first to see
what it actually does and we will talk about it more
press enter to start
you can see what happened there it started
14:01:19 and finished to 14:01:20 so
my reaction time is point 79 of a second
so just under a second so I'm not fully
asleep let's try again a bit slower there and you can see I was .98 second at
that time but you can see that seems to be working
and the local time can confirm that
that is the right time if we click on
this and have a look
Wednesday 2:01 p.m. as you can see so that is working so getting back to the documentation string
for time let's go have a look at that
will search for strft click on that and you can see these various
options and we used the %X in uppercase locale's
appropriate time representation so
we just telling it this case that we only want
the time component out of the string effectively
out of the date to be shown on the
screen so that's a basic example of this
problems with this program though I'll show you one
quickly and then I'm going to end the
video and will continue on the next one but
one of the first problems we got is I can press enter twice there
and then wait for it to wake up and you can see
their my reaction time is points .0001580
that's because I already pressed enter
twice and the computer accepted that
enter in advance and that's why I was able
to do it so quickly so there's a problem
with that in that I can cheat and also another
problem but we'll start talking about
both of those issues and also how to correct those in the
next video